Wisdom is one of those qualities that is difficult to define—because it encompasses so much—but which people generally recognize when they 
encounter it. And it is encountered most obviously in the realm of decision-making.

Psychologists tend to agree that wisdom involves an integration of knowledge, experience, and deep understanding, as well as a tolerance 
for the uncertainties of life. There's an awareness of how things play out over time, and it confers a sense of balance.
Wise people generally share an optimism that life's problems can be solved and experience a certain amount of calm in facing difficult 
decisions. Intelligence may be necessary for wisdom, but it definitely isn't sufficient; an ability to see the big picture, a sense of
 proportion, intellectual humility, and considerable introspection also contribute to its development.

Wisdom can be acquired only through experience, but by itself, experience does not automatically confer wisdom. Researchers are continuing
 to probe the social, emotional, and cognitive processes that transmute experience into wisdom.

How do researchers define wisdom?
Numerous theories are emerging to try to measure and model wisdom. A leading theory, developed by psychologists Paul Baltes and others, 
defines wisdom as “expert knowledge in the fundamental pragmatics of life that permits exceptional insight, judgment, and advice about 
complex and uncertain matters.” That encompasses five key components: rich procedural knowledge, rich factual knowledge, an understanding
 of different life contexts, an awareness of the relativism of values and priorities, and the ability to recognize and manage uncertainty. 
These criteria are measured by introducing hypothetical scenarios and assessing what participants would consider or do in those situations.

But there are other theories of wisdom as well. Sociologist Monika Ardelt believes that individuals develop wisdom as personality 
characteristics encompassing reflection, compassion, and the pursuit of truth. Psychologist Robert Sternberg understands wisdom as balance 
between oneself and others so that actions are directed at the common good.

What are the components of wisdom?
Wisdom encompasses cognitive components, such as knowledge and experience, reflective components, or the ability to examine situations and
 oneself, and prosocial components, meaning benevolence and compassion. Wisdom is also connected to abilities such as perspective-taking, 
open-mindedness, and intellectual humility.